# 1.4 Introduction to Dart Language

In the previous sections, we have introduced the relevant features of the Dart language. Readers can refer to them. If you are already familiar with Dart syntax, you can skip this section. However, if you are not familiar with Dart, there is no need to worry. According to the author's experience, if you have experience with other programming languages, especially Java or JavaScript, you will find it very easy to get started with Dart. Of course, if you are an iOS developer, you don't need to worry either, as Dart also has some features that are similar to Swift, such as named parameters. When I was learning Dart at the time, I only spent an hour, went through the Dart official Language Tour, and then started to write Flutter, so there is no need to be afraid.

In the author's view, Dart should have borrowed from Java and JavaScript during its design, while also introducing some modern programming language features, such as null safety. In addition to this, there are also some original syntax, such as cascading operators. In short, after becoming familiar with it, you will find Dart to be a very interesting programming language!

Dart's static syntax is very similar to Java, such as type definitions, function declarations, generics, etc., while its dynamic features are similar to JavaScript, such as functional features, asynchronous support, etc. In addition to integrating the strengths of Java and JavaScript, Dart also has some other expressive syntax, such as optional named parameters, `..` (cascade operator), `?.` (conditional member access operator), and `??` (null-aware assignment operator). In fact, readers who are familiar with programming languages will find that in Dart, we can see not only the shadow of Java and JavaScript, but also the presence of other programming languages, as named parameters have long been common in Objective-C and Swift, and the `??` operator has been present in PHP 7.0 syntax, so we can see that Google has high expectations for the Dart language and wants to make Dart a programming language that combines the strengths of many other languages.

Next, we will briefly introduce the syntax of Dart, and then make a brief comparison between Dart and JavaScript and Java, to help readers better understand.

> Note: Since this book is not specifically about introducing the Dart language, this chapter will mainly introduce the syntax features commonly used in Flutter development. If you want to learn more about Dart, you can go to the Dart official website, and there is already a lot of Dart-related information on the internet. In addition, Dart 2.14 has been officially released, so all examples in this book adopt the Dart 2.14 syntax.



## 1.4.1 Variable Declaration

### 1. `var` Keyword

Similar to `var` in JavaScript, it can accept variables of any type, but the biggest difference is that in Dart, once a type is assigned to the `var` variable, its type cannot be changed, as shown below:

```dart
var t = "hi world";
// The following code will cause an error in Dart because the type of variable t has been determined as String,
// and once the type is determined, it cannot be changed.
t = 1000;
```

The above code is not a problem in JavaScript, so front-end developers need to pay attention to this difference. The reason for this difference is that Dart itself is a strongly typed language, and any variable has a determined type. In Dart, when a variable is declared with `var`, Dart will infer its type based on the type of the first assigned data, and once the compilation is complete, its type is already determined. In contrast, JavaScript is a purely weakly typed scripting language, and `var` is just a way of declaring a variable.

### 2. `dynamic` and `Object`

`Object` is the root base class of all objects in Dart, which means that in Dart, all types are subclasses of `Object` (including Function and Null), so any type of data can be assigned to an object declared as `Object`.
`dynamic` and `Object` declared variables can be assigned any type of object, and the type of the assigned value can be changed later, which is different from `var`, as shown below:

```dart
dynamic t;
Object x;
t = "hi world";
x = 'Hello Object';
// The following code is correct
t = 1000;
x = 1000;
```

The difference between `dynamic` and `Object` is that the compiler will provide all possible combinations for the object declared as `dynamic`, whereas the object declared as `Object` can only use the properties and methods of `Object`, and otherwise the compiler will report an error, as shown below:

```dart
 dynamic a;
 Object b = "";
 main() {
   a = "";
   printLengths();
 }   

 printLengths() {
   // This is valid
   print(a.length);
   // The getter 'length' is not defined for the class 'Object'
   print(b.length);
 }
```

This characteristic of `dynamic` requires extra attention when using it, as it can easily introduce a runtime error, for example, the following code will not report an error during compilation but will generate an error during runtime:

```dart
print(a.xx); // a is a string and does not have the "xx" property, no compilation error but runtime error
```

### 3. `final` and `const`

If you never intend to change a variable, use `final` or `const`, not `var`, and not a type. A `final` variable can only be set once. The difference between the two is: a `const` variable is a compile-time constant (replaced directly with the constant value at compile time), while a `final` variable is initialized the first time it is used. When a variable is modified by `final` or `const`, the variable type can be omitted, for example:

```dart
// The String type declaration can be omitted
final str = "hi world";
//final String str = "hi world";
const str1 = "hi world";
//const String str1 = "hi world";
```

### 4. Null Safety

In Dart, everything is an object, which means that if we define a number and use it before initializing it without some kind of check mechanism, it will not result in an error, as shown in the following example:

```dart
test() {
  int i; 
  print(i*8);
}
```

Prior to the introduction of null safety in Dart, the above code did not result in an error before execution, but triggered a runtime error because the value of `i` was null. With the introduction of null safety, when defining variables, we can specify whether the variable is nullable or non-nullable.

```dart
int i = 8; // By default, it is non-nullable and must be initialized during the definition.
int? j; // Defined as a nullable type. For nullable variables, we must perform null checking before using them.

// If we expect a variable to be non-nullable but cannot determine its initial value at the time of definition, we can use the late keyword to indicate that it will be initialized later. However, we must ensure that it is initialized before it is officially used, or else an error will occur.
late int k;
k=9;
```

If we define a variable as a nullable type, in some cases, even if we have assigned a value to it, the preprocessor may still not recognize it. In such cases, we need to explicitly tell the preprocessor that it is no longer null (by adding a "!" symbol after the variable), for example:

```dart
class Test{
  int? i;
  Function? fun;
  say(){
    if(i!=null) {
      print(i! * 8); // Since null checking has been performed, i must not be null here. If not explicitly declared, the IDE will show an error.
    }
    if(fun!=null){
      fun!(); // Same as above
    }
  }
}
```

If a function variable is nullable, we can use syntactic sugar when calling it:

```dart
fun?.call(); // It will be called only if fun is not null
```

## 1.4.2 Functions

Dart is a true object-oriented language, so even functions are objects and have a type `Function`. This means that functions can be assigned to variables or passed as parameters to other functions, which is a typical feature of functional programming.

### 1. Function Declaration

```dart
bool isNoble(int atomicNumber) {
  return _nobleGases[atomicNumber] != null;
}
```

If the return value type is not explicitly declared in a Dart function declaration, it is treated as `dynamic` by default. Note that there is no type inference for the return value:

```dart
typedef bool CALLBACK();

// The return type is not specified, so it defaults to dynamic, not bool
isNoble(int atomicNumber) {
  return _nobleGases[atomicNumber] != null;
}

void test(CALLBACK cb){
   print(cb()); 
}
// Error: isNoble is not of type bool
test(isNoble);
```

For functions that contain only one expression, a shorthand syntax can be used:

```dart
bool isNoble (int atomicNumber)=> true ;   
```

### 2. Functions as Variables

```dart
var say = (str){
  print(str);
};
say("hi world");
```

### 3. Passing Functions as Parameters

```dart
// Define a function execute that has a function as a parameter
void execute(var callback) {
    callback(); // Execute the function passed in
}
// Call execute and pass an arrow function as a parameter
execute(() => print("xxx"))
```

#### 1) Optional Positional Parameters

Wrap a group of function parameters in `[]` to mark them as optional positional parameters and place them at the end of the parameter list:```dart
String say(String from, String msg, [String? device]) {
  var result = '$from says $msg';
  if (device != null) {
    result = '$result with a $device';
  }
  return result;
}
```

Here is an example of calling this function without optional parameters:

```dart
say('Bob', 'Howdy'); //result: Bob says Howdy
```

Here is an example of calling this function with the third parameter:

```dart
say('Bob', 'Howdy', 'smoke signal'); //result: Bob says Howdy with a smoke signal
```

#### 2) Optional Named Parameters

When defining a function, use {param1, param2, …} to specify named parameters, placed at the end of the parameter list. For example:

```dart
// Set [bold] and [hidden] flags
void enableFlags({bool bold, bool hidden}) {
    // ... 
}
```

When calling the function, you can use specified named parameters. For example: `paramName: value`

```dart
enableFlags(bold: true, hidden: false);
```

Optional named parameters are widely used in Flutter. **Note that you cannot use both optional positional parameters and optional named parameters simultaneously**.

## 1.4.3 mixin

Dart does not support multiple inheritance, but it supports mixins, which can "combine" multiple classes. Let's understand this through an example.

Define a Person class, implementing functions for eating, speaking, walking, and coding, along with a Dog class, implementing functions for eating and walking:

```dart
class Person {
  say() {
    print('say');
  }
}

mixin Eat {
  eat() {
    print('eat');
  }
}

mixin Walk {
  walk() {
    print('walk');
  }
}

mixin Code {
  code() {
    print('key');
  }
}

class Dog with Eat, Walk{}
class Man extends Person with Eat, Walk, Code{}
```

We have defined several mixins and then combined them into different classes using the `with` keyword. One thing to note is that if multiple mixins have the same method, the one from the last mixin is used by default during the `with`. Methods in mixins can call previous mixins' or classes' methods using the `super` keyword. Here, we have only introduced the basic features of mixins. Readers can explore more detailed content about mixins on their own.

## 1.4.4 Asynchronous Support

Dart's class library has many functions that return `Future` or `Stream` objects. These functions are called **asynchronous functions**; they return only after setting up some time-consuming operations, such as IO operations, instead of waiting for the operation to complete.

The `async` and `await` keywords support asynchronous programming, allowing you to write asynchronous code that looks similar to synchronous code.

### 1. `Future`

`Future` is very similar to `Promise` in JavaScript, representing the final completion (or failure) of an asynchronous operation and its result value representation. In simple terms, it is used to handle asynchronous operations: it executes the successful operation when it succeeds, captures errors or stops subsequent operations when it fails. A `Future` corresponds to only one result, either successful or failed.

Due to its extensive functionality, we will only introduce the commonly used APIs and features here. Also, please remember that the return value of all `Future` APIs is still a `Future` object, so chaining calls is very convenient.

#### 1) `Future.then`

For ease of demonstration, in this example, we use `Future.delayed` to create a delayed task (in a real scenario, it would be a real time-consuming task, such as a network request) that returns the string "hi world!" after 2 seconds. Then, we receive the asynchronous result in `then` and print the result. The code is as follows:

```dart
Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 2),(){
   return "hi world!";
}).then((data){
   print(data);
});
```

#### 2) `Future.catchError`

If an error occurs in the asynchronous task, we can catch the error in `catchError`. We can modify the previous example to capture errors:
```dart
Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 2), (){
   //return "hi world!";
   throw AssertionError("Error");  
}).then((data){
   //When the asynchronous task is successful, it will execute here
   print("success");
}).catchError((e){
   //When the asynchronous task fails, it will execute here
   print(e);
});
```

In this example, we threw an exception in the asynchronous task. The callback function of `then` will not be executed, instead, the `catchError` callback function will be called. It is important to note that not only the `catchError` callback can catch errors, the `then` method also has an optional parameter `onError`, which can also be used to catch exceptions:

```dart
Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 2), () {
	//return "hi world!";
	throw AssertionError("Error");
}).then((data) {
	print("success");
}, onError: (e) {
	print(e);
});
```

#### 3) `Future.whenComplete`

Sometimes, we encounter scenarios where we need to do something regardless of whether the asynchronous task is successful or not. For example, displaying a loading dialog before a network request and closing the dialog after the request ends. In such scenarios, there are two methods. The first is to close the dialog separately in `then` or `catch`. The second method is to use the `whenComplete` callback of `Future`. Let's modify the previous example to demonstrate this:

```dart
Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 2),(){
   //return "hi world!";
   throw AssertionError("Error");
}).then((data){
   //Executed when successful
   print(data);
}).catchError((e){
   //Executed when failed
   print(e);
}).whenComplete((){
   //Executed regardless of success or failure
});
```

#### 4) `Future.wait`

There are times when we need to wait for multiple asynchronous tasks to complete before performing additional operations. For example, if a UI needs to retrieve data from two separate network interfaces and process the data only after both requests are successful, we can use `Future.wait`. It accepts an array of `Future` parameters, and the `then` success callback is only triggered when all the futures in the array are successful. If any of the `Future` tasks fail, it will trigger the error callback. Below is a demonstration of using `Future.wait` to simulate obtaining data from two asynchronous tasks using `Future.delayed` and then printing the combined results:

```dart
Future.wait([
  // Returns a result after 2 seconds
  Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 2), () {
    return "hello";
  }),
  // Returns a result after 4 seconds
  Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 4), () {
    return " world";
  })
]).then((results){
  print(results[0]+results[1]);
}).catchError((e){
  print(e);
});
```

Running the above code will print "hello world" to the console after 4 seconds.

### 2. async/await

The `async/await` feature in Dart is similar to that in JavaScript - it serializes asynchronous tasks. If you are already familiar with the usage of `async/await` in JavaScript, you can skip this section.

#### 1) Callback Hell

If there is a large amount of asynchronous logic in the code and numerous asynchronous tasks depend on the results of other asynchronous tasks, there will inevitably be nested callbacks in `Future.then`. For example, suppose we have a requirement where users must first log in, then upon successful login, retrieve the user ID, and finally use the user ID to fetch the user's personal information, which should then be cached in the local file system for convenience. The code looks like this:

```dart
// Define the asynchronous tasks
Future<String> login(String userName, String pwd){
	...
    // User login
};
Future<String> getUserInfo(String id){
	...
    // Retrieve user information
};
Future saveUserInfo(String userInfo){
	...
	// Save user information 
};
```

Next, execute the entire task flow:
```dart
login("alice","******").then((id){
// Retrieve user information using the id after a successful login
 getUserInfo(id).then((userInfo){
    // Save the user information after retrieving it
    saveUserInfo(userInfo).then((){
       // After saving user information, proceed with other operations
        ...
    });
  });
})
```

You can feel that if there are a lot of asynchronous dependencies in the business logic, there will be the situation of nested callbacks as shown above. Excessive nesting will lead to decreased code readability, increased error rates, and very difficult maintenance. This problem is vividly referred to as **Callback Hell**. The callback hell problem was very prominent in JavaScript, and it was the most criticized aspect of JavaScript. However, with the release of the ECMAScript standard, this problem was very well solved, and the two great tools for solving callback hell are `Promise` introduced in ECMAScript 6, and `async/await` introduced in ECMAScript 7. In Dart, it almost completely migrated these two features from JavaScript: `Future` is equivalent to `Promise`, and `async/await` has not even changed its name. Next, let's see how to eliminate the nesting problem in the example above using `Future` and `async/await`.

#### 2) Eliminating Callback Hell

There are two main ways to eliminate callback hell:

**1. Using Future to Eliminate Callback Hell**

```dart
login("alice","******").then((id){
  	return getUserInfo(id);
}).then((userInfo){
    return saveUserInfo(userInfo);
}).then((e){
   // Proceed with the next operation 
}).catchError((e){
  // Error handling  
  print(e);
});
```

As mentioned earlier, *"the return value of all `Future` APIs is still a `Future` object, so it can be conveniently chain-called"*. If a `Future` is returned in `then`, the `future` will be executed, and after execution, the subsequent `then` callback will be triggered, thus avoiding nested layers.

**2. Using async/await to Eliminate Callback Hell**

The approach of returning a `Future` within a `Future` callback can avoid nested layers, but there is still a layer of callbacks. Is there a way to execute asynchronous tasks just like writing synchronous code without using callbacks? The answer is yes, and this requires the use of `async/await`. First, let's look at the code directly, and then explain it:

```dart
task() async {
   try{
    String id = await login("alice","******");
    String userInfo = await getUserInfo(id);
    await saveUserInfo(userInfo);
    // Proceed with the next operation   
   } catch(e){
    // Error handling   
    print(e);   
   }  
}
```

- `async` is used to indicate that the function is asynchronous. The defined function will return a `Future` object, and callbacks can be added using the `then` method.

- `await` is followed by a `Future`, indicating that it waits for the completion of the asynchronous task, and moves on only after the async completion. `await` must appear inside an `async` function.

As seen, we have represented an asynchronous flow using synchronous code through `async/await`.

> In fact, whether in JavaScript or Dart, `async/await` is just syntactic sugar, and the compiler or interpreter ultimately transforms it into a Promise (Future) call chain.

## 1.4.5 Stream

`Stream` is also used to receive asynchronous event data. Unlike `Future`, it can receive the results (success or failure) of multiple asynchronous operations. This means that while performing asynchronous tasks, results data or error exceptions can be passed through multiple trigger events of success or failure. `Stream` is commonly used in scenarios where data needs to be read multiple times in asynchronous tasks, such as network content downloads, file reading/writing, etc. For example:```
The above code will output in sequence:

```
I/flutter (17666): hello 1
I/flutter (17666): Error
I/flutter (17666): hello 3
```

The code is very simple, so it won't be elaborated on.

> Thought experiment: Since a Stream can receive multiple events, can it be used to implement a subscriber pattern event bus?

## 1.4.6 Comparison of Dart with Java and JavaScript

Based on the introduction above, I believe you should have a preliminary understanding of Dart. Since I also use Java and JavaScript in my daily work, I will share my opinion based on my experience, comparing Dart with Java and JavaScript.

> The reason for comparing Dart with Java and JavaScript is due to the fact that the two are typical representatives of strongly typed and weakly typed languages, and many parts of Dart's syntax are borrowed from Java and JavaScript.

### 1. Dart vs Java

Objectively speaking, Dart is indeed more expressive than Java in terms of syntax. At the VM level, Dart VM has undergone repeated optimizations in memory management and throughput. However, I did not find any specific performance comparisons. In my opinion, as long as Dart becomes popular, there should be no worry about VM performance, especially considering Google's extensive technological expertise in Go, JavaScript (v8), and Dalvik (the Java VM on Android). It's worth noting that in Flutter, Dart can achieve garbage collection (GC) within 10ms, so the determining factor when comparing Dart with Java is not likely to be performance. In terms of syntax, Dart is more expressive than Java, and most importantly, Dart's support for functional programming is far stronger than Java (which currently only supports Lambda expressions). The real shortcoming of Dart currently is its ecosystem, but I believe that with the increasing popularity of Flutter, the Dart ecosystem will accelerate development. What Dart needs right now is time.

### 2. Dart vs JavaScript

JavaScript's "weak typing" has long been criticized, which led to the market presence of TypeScript (a superset of JavaScript that adds "type" but remains syntactically compatible with JavaScript). Among the scripting languages I have used (Python, PHP), JavaScript is undoubtedly the scripting language with the best support for dynamicism. For instance, in JavaScript, you can dynamically extend properties for any object at any time, which is a powerful tool for JavaScript experts. However, everything has its pros and cons. JavaScript's powerful dynamic features are also a double-edged sword. Some people often criticize the dynamic nature of JavaScript, stating that its flexibility leads to unpredictable code and uncontrollable modifications. Some individuals are always concerned about code, wanting it to be controllable, and hoping for a static type checking system to help reduce errors. Due to these reasons, in Flutter, Dart has almost abandoned some dynamic features of scripting languages, such as not supporting reflection and not supporting dynamic function creation. Additionally, starting from Dart 2.0, Dart has enforced type checking (Strong Mode), phasing out the previous checked mode and optional type, making Dart's type safety level similar to that of TypeScript and CoffeeScript. Therefore, Dart does not have any obvious advantage in terms of dynamicity alone. However, looking at the bigger picture, Dart can be used for server-side scripting, app development, and web development, which gives it an advantage!

In the first edition of this book, I expressed a strong confidence in the future of the Dart language. In fact, over the past few years, the number of projects developed in Dart on Github has steadily increased at a rapid pace. So, enjoy it!