# 1.1 Introduction to Mobile Development Technologies

This section will mainly introduce the evolution of mobile development technologies and provide an understanding of the background of Flutter technology. The author believes that it is very important to understand the background of a new technology because only by understanding what it was like before can we understand why it is the way it is now.

## 1.1.1 Native Development and Cross-Platform Technologies

### 1. Native Development

Native applications refer to applications specific to a particular mobile platform (such as iOS or Android), using development tools and languages supported by the respective platform, and directly calling the SDK API provided by the system. For example, an Android native application refers to an application developed using Java or Kotlin language directly calling the Android SDK, while an iOS native application refers to an application developed by calling the iOS SDK using Objective-C or Swift language. Native development has the following main advantages:

- Access to all platform functions (GPS, camera);
- Fast speed, high performance, capable of implementing complex animations and drawings, providing a good overall user experience.

Main disadvantages include:

- Platform-specific, high development cost; maintaining different codebases for different platforms increases labor costs;
- Fixed content, weak dynamism; in most cases, new features can only be updated through version releases.

In the early stages of mobile Internet development, business scenarios were not complex, and native development was able to cope with product requirements iterations. However, in recent years, with the advent of the Internet of Things era and the rapid development of mobile Internet, in many business scenarios, traditional pure native development can no longer meet the increasing business demands. This is mainly manifested in:

- Increasing demand for dynamic content; when requirements change, pure native applications need to update their content through version upgrades. However, the process of app submission and review takes time, which is difficult to accept in the rapidly changing Internet era. Therefore, the demand for application dynamism (updating application content without releasing a new version) becomes urgent.
- Rapid changes in business requirements, increased development costs; because native development generally requires maintaining separate development teams for Android and iOS, during version iterations, both labor and testing costs will increase.

In summary, pure native development mainly faces the issues of dynamism and development costs. In response to these issues, some cross-platform dynamism frameworks have emerged.

### 2. Introduction to Cross-Platform Technologies

To address the problems faced by native development, the industry has been continuously striving to find good solutions. As of today, there are many cross-platform frameworks (note that in this book, "cross-platform" refers specifically to Android and iOS platforms), which can be divided into three types based on their principles:

- H5 + Native (Cordova, Ionic, WeChat Mini Program)
- JavaScript development + Native rendering (React Native, Weex)
- Custom UI + Native (Qt for mobile, Flutter)

In the following chapters, we will look at the principles and advantages and disadvantages of these three types of frameworks one by one.

## 1.1.2 Introduction to Hybrid Technologies

### 1. H5 + Native

The principle of these frameworks is mainly to implement dynamic content in the app using HTML5 (referred to as H5), and load it using native web loading controls WebView (Android) or WKWebView (iOS) (in the future, we will use "WebView" to collectively refer to web loading controls in Android and iOS unless otherwise specified). In this solution, the H5 portion can be changed at any time without the need for version release, meeting the demand for dynamism. Additionally, since H5 code only needs to be developed once and can run on both Android and iOS platforms, it can reduce development costs. This development model, which combines H5 with native development, is called **hybrid development**. An app developed in this hybrid mode is referred to as a **hybrid app** or an **HTMLybrid app**. If most of an app's functionality is implemented using H5, it is referred to as a **Web App**.

Currently, typical representatives of hybrid development frameworks include Cordova and Ionic. Most apps have some features developed using H5. Thus far, HTMLybrid apps are still the most universal and mature cross-platform solution.

Here, we need to mention mini programs, as many of the current mini programs developed by various companies in China are based on web technology stacks, with underlying rendering methods mostly combining WebView and native approaches.

### 2. Hybrid Development TechnologiesAs mentioned earlier, native development can access all platform functionalities, while in hybrid development, H5 code runs in a WebView. WebView is essentially a browser kernel, and its JavaScript still runs in a sandbox with restricted permissions, so most system capabilities are not accessible, such as accessing the file system or using Bluetooth. Therefore, for functionalities that H5 cannot implement, native development is required.

Hybrid frameworks generally pre-implement some system access APIs in native code and expose them to WebView for JavaScript to call. Thus, a communication bridge is needed between JavaScript in WebView and native APIs. This bridge is responsible for transmitting and handling call messages between JavaScript and native code. The message transmission must adhere to a standard protocol, which specifies the format and meaning of the messages. We call the tool that relies on WebView and is used for communication and implements a certain message transmission protocol between JavaScript and native code the **WebView JavaScript Bridge**, or simply **JsBridge**. It is the core of hybrid development frameworks.

#### 1) Example: JavaScript calling native API to retrieve phone model

Here we take Android as an example to implement a native API for retrieving the phone model for JavaScript to call. This example demonstrates the process of JavaScript calling the native API, allowing readers to intuitively experience the calling process. We will use the open-source dsBridge, implemented by the author on GitHub, as the JsBridge for communication. dsBridge is a cross-platform JsBridge library, and in this example, we only use its synchronous call functionality.

- First, implement the API to retrieve the phone model in native code `getPhoneModel`

  ```java
  class JsAPI {
   @JavascriptInterface
   public Object getPhoneModel(Object msg) {
     return Build.MODEL;
   }
  }
  ```

- Register the native API with JsBridge through WebView

  ```java
  import wendu.dsbridge.DWebView
  ...
  // DWebView extends WebView, provided by dsBridge
  DWebView dwebView = (DWebView) findViewById(R.id.dwebview);
  // Register the native API with JsBridge
  dwebView.addJavascriptObject(new JsAPI(), null);
  ```

- Call the native API in JavaScript

  ```javascript
  var dsBridge = require("dsbridge")
  // Call the native API `getPhoneModel` directly
  var model = dsBridge.call("getPhoneModel");
  // Print the model
  console.log(model);
  ```

The above example demonstrates the process of JavaScript calling the native API. Similarly, generally, an excellent JsBridge also supports native calling JavaScript, which dsBridge also supports. If you are interested, you can visit the GitHub dsBridge project page for more information.

Now, looking back, hybrid applications essentially pre-implement a series of APIs in the first step for JavaScript to call, giving JavaScript the ability to access system functionalities. Seeing this, I believe you can also implement a hybrid development framework.

### 3. Summary

The advantages of hybrid applications are: dynamic content can be developed using H5, and H5 is a Web technology stack with an open ecosystem and rich community resources, resulting in overall high development efficiency. However, the downside is poor performance experience; WebView can sometimes be inadequate for complex user interfaces or animations.

## 1.1.3 React Native, WeexThis article mainly introduces the principle of **JavaScript development + native rendering** cross-platform framework.

React Native (abbreviated as RN) is a cross-platform mobile application development framework open-sourced by Facebook in April 2015. It is an offshoot of Facebook's earlier open-sourced web framework, React, designed for native mobile application platforms, currently supporting both iOS and Android. RN uses the JSX language (an extension of JavaScript, mainly allowing HTML tags to be written in JavaScript) and CSS for mobile application development. Therefore, individuals familiar with web frontend development techniques require only limited learning to enter the field of mobile application development.

Since RN and the principles of React are similar, and Flutter at the application level is also inspired by React, many ideas are also similar. Therefore, it is necessary for us to have an in-depth understanding of React principles.

React is a **responsive** web framework, so let's first understand two important concepts: the Document Object Model (DOM) tree and reactive programming.

### 1. DOM Tree and Control Tree

The Document Object Model (DOM) is a standard programming interface recommended by the W3C organization for handling extensible markup language, providing a platform-independent and language-independent way to access and modify the content and structure of a document. In other words, this is a standard interface for representing and handling an HTML or XML document. Simply put, the DOM is a document tree corresponding to user interface control trees. In frontend development, it usually refers to the rendering tree corresponding to HTML. However, the broad sense of DOM can also refer to the control tree corresponding to XML layout files in Android. The term **DOM operation** refers to directly operating the rendering tree (or control tree). Therefore, it can be seen that the DOM tree and control tree are equivalent concepts, with the former commonly used in web development and the latter generally used in native development.

### 2. Reactive Programming

React introduces an important concept: when the state changes, the UI automatically changes. The React framework itself responds to user state change events and rebuilds the user interface work. This is a typical **responsive** programming paradigm. Below, we summarize the reactive principles in React:

- Developers only need to focus on state transitions (data). When the state changes, the React framework will automatically rebuild the UI based on the new status.
- After receiving a notification of a user state change, the React framework, based on the current rendering tree, along with the latest state changes, calculates the changed parts of the tree through a diff algorithm, and then only updates the changed parts (DOM operations), avoiding the reconstruction of the entire tree and improving performance.

It is worth noting that in the second step, after a state change, the React framework does not immediately calculate and render the changed parts of the DOM tree. Instead, React establishes an abstraction layer on the basis of the DOM tree, that is, the **virtual DOM tree**. Any changes made to the data and state will be automatically and efficiently synchronized to the virtual DOM, and then batch synchronized with the real DOM, rather than directly manipulating the DOM for each change.

Why can't each change directly manipulate the DOM tree? This is because in the browser, every DOM operation has the potential to cause redrawing or reflow (re-layout of the browser, determining the size and position of DOM nodes):

1. If the DOM only changes in appearance, such as a color change, it will cause the browser to redraw the interface.
2. If the structure of the DOM tree changes, such as size, layout, or node hiding, it will cause the browser to reflow.

Both redrawing and reflow in the browser are expensive operations. If every change directly manipulates the DOM, it will lead to performance issues. Batch operations trigger only one DOM update, leading to better performance.

> Thought-provoking question: Shouldn't diff operations and batch DOM updates be the responsibility of the browser? Is it appropriate for third-party frameworks to do this?

### 3. React Native

The previous section mentioned that React Native is an offshoot of React on native mobile application platforms. So what are the main differences between the two? The main difference lies in the mapping object of the virtual DOM. In React, the virtual DOM finally maps to the browser's DOM tree, while in RN, the virtual DOM maps to native controls through JavaScriptCore.

JavaScriptCore is a JavaScript interpreter. Its main functions in React Native are:

1. Providing a runtime environment for JavaScript.
2. Serving as a bridge for communication between JavaScript and native applications, similar to JsBridge. In fact, in iOS, many JsBridge implementations are based on JavaScriptCore.

The process of mapping the virtual DOM to native controls in RN mainly consists of two steps:1. Layout message passing; passing layout information of virtual DOM to native;

2. Native renders corresponding native controls based on layout information;

With this, React Native achieves cross-platform support. Compared to hybrid applications, due to the native rendering of React Native, its performance is slightly better than that of hybrid applications using H5. Additionally, React Native provides many native components that correspond to web components, allowing developers to develop apps using web technology stacks in most cases. This approach makes it possible to maintain a single codebase and achieve cross-platform compatibility.

### 4. Weex

Weex is a cross-platform mobile development framework released by Alibaba in 2016, with a similar concept and principle to React Native. Both are based on native rendering. However, the difference lies in the application-level development syntax (i.e., DSL, Domain Specific Language): Weex supports Vue syntax and Rax syntax. Rax's DSL is based on React JSX syntax, while the DSL of RN is based on React and does not support Vue.

### 5. Summary

The main advantages of JavaScript development combined with native rendering are as follows:

1. Using the web development technology stack, with a large community, quick start, and relatively low development cost.
2. Native rendering significantly improves performance compared to H5.
3. Good dynamism, supporting hot updates.

Drawbacks:

1. When rendering, communication is required between JavaScript and native, which can cause lag in certain scenarios such as dragging due to frequent communication.
2. JavaScript is a scripting language, which requires interpretation during execution (referred to as JIT, Just In Time, generating machine code in real time during execution). As a result, its execution efficiency is still lower compared to compiled languages (compilation languages are executed in AOT, Ahead Of Time, where the source code is preprocessed before execution, usually compiling the source code into machine code or some intermediate code).
3. Since rendering depends on native controls, different platform controls need to be maintained separately, and when the system is updated, community controls may lag behind. In addition, the control system may also be constrained by the native UI system. For example, in Android, gesture conflict disambiguation rules are fixed, making gesture conflict issues very challenging when nesting controls written by different individuals. This leads to high development and maintenance costs when customizing native rendering components.

## 1.1.4 Qt Mobile

Before introducing QT, let's first introduce the "self-draw UI + native" cross-platform technology.

### 1. Self-draw UI + Native

Let's take a look at the last cross-platform technology: self-draw UI + native. The idea of this technology is to draw UI by implementing a unified interface rendering engine on different platforms, without relying on system native controls, so as to achieve consistency in UI across different platforms.

Note that the self-drawing engine solves the cross-platform issue of UI. If it involves other system capabilities, native development is still necessary. The advantages of this platform technology are as follows:

1. High performance; since the self-drawing engine directly calls the system API to draw UI, its performance is close to that of native controls.
2. Flexibility, easy maintenance of component libraries, high fidelity and consistency of UI appearance; as UI rendering does not rely on native controls, there is no need to maintain a separate set of component libraries for different platforms, making the code easy to maintain. Since the component library is the same code and the same rendering engine, the appearance of components can achieve high fidelity and consistency on different platforms. Additionally, since it does not rely on native controls, it is not constrained by the native layout system, making it very flexible.

Drawbacks:

1. Lack of dynamism; in order to ensure UI drawing performance, self-drawing UI systems generally use AOT mode to compile their release package, so after the application is released, code cannot be dynamically delivered like frameworks using JavaScript (JIT) such as Hybrid and RN.
2. Low application development efficiency: Qt uses C++ as its development language, and programming efficiency directly affects app development efficiency. C++ as a static language is less flexible in UI development compared to dynamic languages like JavaScript. Additionally, C++ requires developers to manually manage memory allocation, unlike JavaScript and Java, which have garbage collection (GC) mechanisms.Perhaps you have already guessed that Flutter belongs to this type of cross-platform technology. Yes, Flutter indeed implements a self-drawn engine and has its own UI layout system, with a significant breakthrough in development efficiency. However, the concept of a self-drawn engine is not new, and Flutter is not the first to attempt this. A notable predecessor is the well-known Qt.

### 2. Introduction to Qt

Qt is a cross-platform C++ graphical user interface application development framework developed by the Qt Company in 1991. In 2008, Qt was acquired by Nokia, making it a programming language tool under the Nokia umbrella. In 2012, Qt was acquired by Digia. In April 2014, the cross-platform integrated development environment Qt Creator 3.1.0 was officially released, achieving complete support for iOS, adding plugins such as WinRT and Beautifier, discarding GDB debugging support without a Python interface, integrating Clang-based C/C++ code modules, and making adjustments to support Android, thus achieving comprehensive support for iOS, Android, and WP. It provides all the necessary functions for application developers to build graphical user interfaces.

However, despite Qt's tremendous success on the PC side and its popularity in the community, it performed poorly on mobile platforms. In recent years, although Qt's voice is occasionally heard, it has always been weak. Regardless of Qt's technology and design philosophy, the fact remains that it ultimately failed. The main reasons for this, in the author's opinion, are as follows:

Firstly, the Qt mobile development community is too small, with insufficient learning materials and poor ecosystem.

Secondly, inadequate official promotion and support.

Thirdly, the late effort on the mobile front, where the market had already been dominated by other dynamic frameworks (Hybrid and RN).

Fourthly, compared to web development stacks, C++ development in mobile development inherently has a disadvantage, resulting in low development efficiency for Qt.

Based on these four points, despite being a pioneer in mobile cross-platform self-drawn engines, Qt became a martyr.

## 1.1.5 The Emergence of Flutter

"After repeated requests, it finally emerges." After all the anticipation, we have finally reached the introduction of the main character of this book!

Flutter is a framework released by Google for creating cross-platform, high-performance mobile applications. Similar to Qt mobile, Flutter does not use native controls; instead, it implements a self-drawn engine and uses its own layout and drawing system. So, we may worry—will Flutter face the same issues as Qt mobile, and will it follow in the footsteps of Qt mobile, becoming another martyr? To return to this question, let's first look at the birth process of Flutter: from its initial release at the Google I/O conference in 2017 to the end of August 2021, it has gained 127K stars on Github, ranking among the top 20 in terms of stars. Over the course of more than four years, the Flutter ecosystem has grown rapidly, with numerous successful cases based on Flutter at home and abroad. Essentially, almost all major internet companies in China have dedicated Flutter teams. In short, over the course of 4 years, Flutter has developed rapidly, receiving widespread attention and recognition in the industry and a warm welcome from developers, becoming one of the most popular frameworks for mobile cross-platform development.

Now, let's compare it with Qt mobile:

1. Ecology: The Flutter ecosystem has developed rapidly, with a very active community, both in terms of the number of developers and third-party components, which are very considerable.
2. Technical support: Currently, Google is vigorously promoting Flutter, and many of the authors of Flutter are from the Chromium team, with high activity on Github. Another aspect is that from the birth of Flutter to the present, frequent version releases show that Google has invested considerable resources in Flutter, so there is no need to worry about official technical support.
3. Development efficiency: One codebase, running on multiple platforms; and during the development process, Flutter's hot reload can help developers quickly test, build UI, add features, and fix errors more quickly. It can achieve sub-second hot reload on iOS and Android simulators or real devices without losing state. This is really great. Believe me, if you are a native developer and experience the Flutter development flow, you may not want to go back to doing native development, because few people don't complain about the compilation speed of native development.

Based on these three points, I believe that, like me, readers are also eager to learn more about Flutter. Up to this point, we have gained a comprehensive understanding of mobile development technology, and next, we will enter the main topic of this book. Are you ready?## 1.1.6 Summary

This chapter mainly introduces the current three types of cross-platform technologies in mobile development. Now let's compare them from the perspective of frameworks, as shown in Table 1-1:

| Technology Type               | UI Rendering Method      | Performance | Development Efficiency       | Dynamism      | Framework Representative |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------ | ----------- | ---------------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------ |
| H5 + Native                   | WebView Rendering        | Average     | High                         | Supported     | Cordova, Ionic           |
| JavaScript + Native Rendering | Native Control Rendering | Good        | Medium                       | Supported     | RN, Weex                 |
| Custom UI + Native            | System API Rendering     | Good        | High for Flutter, Low for Qt | Not supported | Qt, Flutter              |

<center>Table 1-1: Comparison of Cross-platform Technologies</center>

The development language in the above table mainly refers to the development language at the application layer, while development efficiency refers to the efficiency of the entire development cycle, including coding time, debugging time, and troubleshooting and compatibility handling time. Dynamism mainly refers to whether it supports the dynamic delivery of code and whether it supports hot updates. It is worth noting that the Release package of Flutter is by default compiled using Dart AOT mode, so it does not support dynamism. However, Dart also has JIT or snapshot running modes, all of which support dynamism.